There it is.
Okay, good.
So, I guess everybody wants to probe the Wonderboy image of yourself of your own.
I mean, the fact that you appeared with such stunning success at the age of, what, 24?
Yeah, 24.
And the pressure that you must have felt that you...
I guess admittedly felt teacher-producer to see him fall off low.
Let's just start here.
Let's enter the conversation.
I'm sure we'll take it very well.
Yeah.
I think, I mean, I know I was definitely trying to poke some fun at the notion of being a Wonderboy.
But the pressures that you talk about that I felt after my first book came out and did fairly well, I mean, I wouldn't say it was a complete smash success that made it impossible for me to
to walk down the street without being recognized.
I think it was a pretty small thing in its way.
It wasn't the success of the book so much or anything like that that I felt putting pressure on me so much.
I think I just was
eager to show that I could do more than that.
Yeah, but you were about 24.
I mean, that's hardly... I mean, I was just going to thought that you'd be next to the age of 24 years old.
Right.
Well, I suppose I just felt after I finished that, inevitably, when you finish something, you think, well, that was fine, but I can do much better.
And I was, I think, so eager to show that I could do better that I think I just...
I chose a book and I chose a subject matter, or I should say a compendium of subject matters.
That was just too much for me to handle, and the book got away from me, I think, because it was too ambitious.
You're talking about Fountain City?
Fountain City, yeah.
so i mean it that was the pressure in that sense was just to try to top myself um and i think i tried a little too hard to top myself um now what's happened to quantum city has that been it's in a couple of cardboard kinko
coffee boxes in my closet in my office, but there it will remain.
Is it there to remind you of your human problems?
Something that you hope at some point that you might even be able to revive?
No, the former.
The former.
You know, I can't quite prove myself to throw it away, but I don't think I'd ever really look at it again.
And I certainly don't plan to show it to anyone.
Did you ever, has anyone seen it?
Yeah, my agent and my editor.
What did your agent think?
They thought I should keep working on it.
Really?
And they were very surprised when I didn't, and I didn't tell them that I had stopped working on it when I started Wonder Boys.
I didn't tell anybody.
Did it just become too unwieldy?
Yeah, it was too much.
There were too many characters and too many different plot lines.
I was working on it for so long that I just lost interest in the material a bit.
Did you think that with so many characters and so many plot lines that there's a chance you could probably chip off a couple of short stories out of it?
No, but I can definitely pull
sentences out of it here and there.
Maybe a few set-piece descriptions or something like that.
And I already have just a few here and there.
So I probably will be cannibalizing it.
I thought Jonathan Yardley's review of this book was really excellent.
So did I. And of course, you know, he's wonderful.
But do you agree that he's looking at the arc of your career, I guess, and he said, the apprenticeship is over.
How do you respond to that?
That was a pretty sobering last paragraph of that review, and it definitely made an impression on me.
Obviously, after everything that he had said before that, I owed it to him to listen to what he said at the end of the review.
I mean, I suppose I'd say that I already knew what he says at the end of the review, and my ambition for myself is certainly to eventually, I would like to be able to attempt a book like Found City and have it not feel like too much and feel that I was up to handling it.
many characters and multiple plot lines and so on.
And then I'm reading War and Peace right now, which I've never read before.
And, you know, it is a wonderful book and it certainly is something to aim for and, of course, you'll never achieve.
It is justifiable.
It's a great novel.
I mean, I remember the first time I read the Brothers Karamasa, I was in college and it was an assignment.
She said, gee, this is good.
This is very good.
The second one.
And, uh,
Now, your first book, I guess, was, did you have any idea that your thesis was being submitted?
Well, the way it happened was I had been showing it all along the whole time I was writing it to my teacher, whose name was Don Heine, who wrote under the name of MacDonald Harris.
M-A-C-D-O-L?
Yes.
How do you spell Heiney?
Heiney, A-T-I-N-E-Y.
Which name was he?
Donald.
He died about three years ago.
Because your quarters don't give a spell.
Right, they don't.
Anyway, I had just been showing it to him when I was half done and three quarters done, and so when I got to the end of my first draft, I showed it to him, naturally, because I'd been showing it to him all along, and I put it in his little box in the English department, and
I was on a Friday and on Monday it was back in my box in Magnus Park with a note saying, I hope you don't mind, but I sent this to my agent in New York.
I can't make any promises.
Don't expect anything.
Maybe they'll be interested.
I knew what had happened, but I didn't give my consent.
I hadn't even gotten to the point yet in my mind that I thought about what to do with it.
This is California?
Yeah, at UC Irvine.
Sorry, I lost the track here.
Were you planning at this point?
Did you see yourself pointing towards a career as a fiction writer?
Yeah, definitely.
I thought I was going to... My roommate,
at that time was a fellow student in the program, and his name is Louis B. Jones, and at the time he had written four novels, and it was his fifth, which he wrote at UC Irvine that got published.
Great.
Yeah, and it's a really great book, Ordinary Money.
And since then, he's written another.
But still, I thought he was 33 or 34 at the time, I think.
And I wanted to be like him.
That was my goal, I thought.
I admired him for having stuck with it so long and having written so many books.
To get back to the Yardley observation, which I thought was interesting, I think it's, of course, keying on the fact that in the first two novels, and I guess they didn't know about the story, that would be all those stories.
The first person, yeah.
Actually, he's wrong about the story.
After I read that, I went back and checked, and I counted them.
And the majority of them are actually written in the third person, yeah.
So he's wrong on that.
Because he's really seen this as a developmental thing, that he wants you to
Right.
I see his point to a degree, but I think that that Grady trip is so different from me.
He's older.
He's older and everything, his whole way of looking at writing and the writers he loves and everything.
We have very few similarities, he and I.
It was such an act of impersonation for me.
The ventriloquism?
Yeah, in a way, to be Grady Chip.
The ventriloquism does bring us the voice.
When you finish, I want to get on to that.
Just remember that, but continue.
I think that's a very big difference between that first person
narration and the one in my first book, which I will conceive is much closer to me and was much less an act of ventricularism in a sense and much more sort of a first novel-y kind of just saying what I think or what I feel.
I don't feel that that's all the case with Wonder Boy.
I think there's a qualitative difference in the kind of narration that each book has.
So I think his point is, you know, I think it's
I see his point, and I do tend to attempt third-person narration, but only because it's fun and interesting and you can get different effects from doing it, not because I think it's
necessarily the next logical step in some kind of progression.
I'm not addressing myself to Yardley, per se.
It's just a departure point.
I really never bring in what other critics say.
I am interested in the observation because we're worth exploring.
He's a great critic.
But I think that with the case of
You have left yourself, even though he's narrating all of them.
He is a funny amount of character.
Right.
It talks to me a little bit about how did you get this voice?
I stumbled on it almost in the beginning.
Did you hear it?
Within the first page and a half of starting to write the book,
I sensed I was on to a voice that I could stay with.
It didn't really ever let me down.
I don't know where it came from or how I knew what Grady was going to sound like, but I found that I did.
I just sort of climbed on his voice and surfed.
Did you realize that this was going to be funny?
I don't think so.
I mean, you know, I didn't deliberately laugh.
Yeah.
I mean, sometimes when I'm working, I find myself laughing at something I just wrote or like rub my hands together.
Definitely.
But I mean, it's not a deliberate effort at all.
I mean, I didn't set out to write.
I never try to be
deliberately funny and when I find myself getting on I feel like a certain brittleness creeping in to my tone because it's brittleness because I'm trying to be too funny then I try to step back and and take that out if I can or tone that down I think it's you know I I think the humor
Really, to me, the humor of Gritty arises out of his own self-deprecation and his willingness to hold himself up as an object of ridicule.
Then you can accept all of the other things he says about other people and the criticisms he makes or the sour generalizations he engages in.
I think it makes it more funny overall because he's so hard on himself.
I think the humor is really organic.
I mean, I think it's impossible to take it out of context.
I know from writing it, from my readers, it's difficult to try and explain the humor by example.
I think you really have to set up the context of the situation.
Right, right.
I really admire that in the writing.
Do you like the art of your premiere right now?
I mean... That's interesting.
I can't complain.
No, you can't complain.
I've been with you with like... Right here.
In fact, that was yours.
They let us go in and sit down.
I just went early in the morning.
I'm surprised they didn't let us sit, but this is my name.
And, you know, he's still in this series, I guess.
And I said, you know...
He feels that now is the time for experimentation at the young age.
He said, you know, when you get older, you do kind of get it wrong.
Because if you're really going to do all new things, you do it wrong.
That's an interesting observation.
Yeah.
I mean, he said, he considers it laziness to think that over the course of your career, the great books are going to come later on.
I mean, you really have to take your whack at it now.
Yeah, I mean, I think that's right.
I mean, I certainly don't.
I always think the book that I'm working on currently, at least for the first two or three years that I'm working on it,
is the best thing that I've ever done.
In the case of Fountain City, after three years I started having my doubts.
I don't know how interested I am in doing old, new things necessarily.
Do you have a sense of where you are as a writer?
How I fit into the tradition?
Well, I think I see myself as a very traditional kind of writer, more conventional in a sense, although I think
I'm talking about arts with conventions of another time.
But I'm not trying any kind of bold, formal experimentation.
I'm not trying any... I don't want to... I don't know, perform any kind of surgery on the English language or anything like that.
Would you consider yourself a storyteller in a traditional sense?
That would be...
No, I mean, I would like to consider myself a storyteller, but I think telling a story is to me the hardest part of writing.
The thing I have to work on the most, and the thing I'm most deliberate and careful about, because I feel like it's the thing that in a sense comes at least naturally to me, of all the various tools you need to be a writer.
And I think storytelling obviously is one of the most important ones.
That's the one that I have to work on.
Do you have a sense of who your reader is?
Well, it's changing.
Earlier, after my first book, I would have said my readership tended to be young and tended to be somewhat gay.
But after this book has come out, and I've gotten a lot of response, because I published the email address and the jacket of that book, so I got a lot of email, and I got...
know you can judge from the people that show up for your readings and so on and it's a much more varied group than it used to be in terms of age um just last night i was answering email and there was some from a kid there's a message yeah my laptop there was a message from a kid who just graduated from uva he was 22 and and then there was a message from somebody in california who said he's in his 50s and
They take my column in Charlottesville, by the way.
Oh, do they?
Oh, man, I hope you see it.
I read about 25 papers.
Yeah, that's what I actually told you.
Not in California, unfortunately, but I'm working on largely college towns, and that's why I was really interested.
I would tend to think that you've been a really very solid following,
I've had Eugene, Oregon, Knoxville, and Charlottesville, and Austin.
We're going to Austin.
When?
Friday.
This won't be out by night for you, but that's fine.
Anyway, I'm sorry.
Yeah, I mean, it just seems I've gotten much more diverse in terms of men and women and older and younger.
That was so interesting.
Thank you.
This is funny.
I mean, it seems to me to pick you with motivation.
I know, that was funny.
That was so funny.
How do you respond to that when you see it?
I mean, I guess it's a compliment in a way, because you really did.
You characterized without sentimentality or without... Yeah, I took it as a compliment.
...a segment of the community in an honest way.
And so this critic made an assumption
Were you surprised when you saw this?
Yeah, I was surprised.
When was that?
That was 1988.
Right when the book came out.
It was a nice picture.
I don't remember it.
I was a book editor then, so it was a literary event.
Of course, it was a few years ago, isn't it?
I'm sorry I missed it.
Where were you a book editor?
In Worcester.
I came through Boston for that book too, although I didn't do a reading in Boston.
They had me out in Sudbury.
It's close to where I am.
I had my reading in Sudbury.
Three people showed up.
A woman and a father and his eight-year-old son who happened to wander into the bookstore and they got shanghaied into it.
And I sat in a chair, and they sat, like one sat there and one sat there.
It was like story hour at the library.
It really is, uh... I just have, I have a book that's a non-fiction.
Yeah.
You know, you really, it is sobering to go to some sightings.
And you're all excited.
I know.
And most of the people who walk past, they look, they avert their eyes so they don't have to... Well, I love a guy on the fucking side of the line.
Congratulations, I love the jacket, the book jacket.
I may come back later.
Don't you feel like you're just like those people that have outside of Hickory Farms with the cheese and the sausage?
Yeah, I know, and you feel like you have to buy a thing on the sausage.
That's the fine news.
It's a good quality.
What was the first print of the first one?
Was it Ryan?
I think it was
Pretty good for a first book, yeah, first novel.
Something like that.
Really?
And then it went into four printings.
Great.
How many else together did it work?
I think four.
I mean, four printings.
I don't know how many copies.
That's terrific.
That was moral, right?
Yeah, that was moral.
The paperback, I know, they just recently, like,
I sat down and did an accounting, and it has sold just about 100,000 copies.
That's wonderful.
That's pretty good.
The fact that you emerged in a generation at the time, I guess there was a wave of young writers appearing.
Right.
You see, you have distinguished yourself by hard work and dedication and no controversy.
Yeah.
I mean, you really explained that.
You seem to have a good rest of your life.
You have a Pittsburgh work out.
It's very pressing.
Thanks.
I mean, I think it's just, I'm not, I think it has a lot to do with the fact that I didn't live in New York.
No, I was not.
My entree into the literary run was not through New York and through... Yes, I mean, it's not a real glamorous place, and I just don't... You know, that kind of life of night clubbing and
and hanging around with famous people and so on just didn't ever appeal to me.
I just, I like to do my writing and then... It seems to me that we are.
Well, Casio said the same thing, by the way.
He said, you know, he's a young guy, and he said, he said, I feel that the time to write is now, not to go to cocktail parties, because the time might pass you by, and it's gone.
Well, I don't even have to look at it that way, because I have no interest in going to cocktail parties.
I hate parties.
I'm not a very social...
person i can't i just i'm very uncomfortable in those kind of settings and if i did go i would just stand in the corner so it's not it's not even a temptation so i don't even have to uh remind myself that the time is now or anything even if the time were now i still wouldn't do it
If you would explain to me, you know, Pittsburgh as metaphor for you, or is it a metaphor, or is it just a very comfortable place to hang your hat?
Very much that.
I mean, I think the first book, it was very natural for me to set in Pittsburgh because I had lived there fairly recently.
I had a raft of experiences there that I was able to draw on and to make a novel out of and so on.
So that was natural and inevitable.
I think...
I never ever expected to go back again, ever.
I thought that was the book I had written in Pittsburgh.
But I think that in the aftermath of the collapse of Fountain City, when I was feeling very shaky about myself and my work, and I had a lot of doubts about whether I could really do it again, it just was such a comfortable place for me.
It felt so safe and secure.
I knew it.
I knew it really well.
And I just, in a way, I think I kind of fled to the safety of Pittsburgh.
As a physical place or as a... I mean, in my imagination.
Do you feel you know it well enough to... Just about.
I mean, I think between this book and the first one now, I've said about everything I know about Pittsburgh.
And that's about it.
So what happens from here?
Are you going to be like Will Kennedy?
No.
I know I would have said it after the first one, too, but that's it.
I'm not going back.
The new one's set in New York.
Manhattan?
Yeah, in the 1930s.
Starting in 1939, going through the 40s into...
1954.
That's adorable.
Is the book in progress, as we speak?
Yeah, it's going well.
You're feeling well?
Feeling good about it?
Yeah, a lot of fun.
That's terrific.
And how are you enjoying the house husband's scene?
Well, it just got a lot easier because my wife changed jobs and is now teaching law school at Loyola Law School in Los Angeles, so she's around a lot more, at home a lot more, so it's much more of a joint effort now.
than it was when she was working full-time.
So my burden has lessened somewhat.
But yeah, I love it.
I mean, it's my job around the house to do the shopping and cook dinner.
Yeah, I mean, I'm the cook, that's for sure.
My wife's not much of a cook.
Really my favorite thing to do is take my daughter to the grocery store and do the shopping.
She's 15 months old.
She's just to the age now where I can leave her on the kitchen floor with some
Tupperware or pots and pans, and she sits there while I make dinner the whole time and plays by herself.
But this works because you write at night.
Right.
It's just the opposite.
Yeah, you write in the morning?
Well, yeah, I have to be fresh.
I have to be awake.
Yeah.
That's when I'm awake and alert, strangely, yeah.
I can't work in the morning.
I just cannot.
You don't get tired?
You take naps or anything like that?
No, but I sleep in.
Do you?
Yeah, I sleep till 10, 10.30.
Uh-huh.
I go to bed around 3 usually.
What time?
3.
So, like, what hour?
I work from 10 to 3, Monday to Thursday.
Sunday to Thursday.
You write on a word processor?
Yeah, on a Mac.
And have you always written on a word?
As soon as I came out, yeah.
That's great.
I had a teacher in college that, one of the first writing classes I took, who switched us all on to typewriting on a typewriter.
And once I had...
I've gotten used to that.
It was pretty easy to make the adjustment to the computer.
Tell me about your name now.
I thought it was French.
I know it looks French, but it's Russian.
It's white Russian.
I'm called Belarusian.
It means shepherd.
You've told a number of your interviewers that one of the great defining moments of your life, I guess, is how you were shattered by the fact that your parents split up.
Does this reflect itself at all in the writing that you draw on?
Well, yeah.
I wrote half of the story collection is a series of linked short stories that's about a family falling apart.
I drew very directly on my own experience for those stories, but I think
Beyond that, it's been pointed out to me, I'm not sure I was really aware of it, until it was pointed out to me that it seems like a kind of recurring theme in what I write is not just families, but the notion of like defining a family and people sort of trying to define families for themselves.
It goes on very much in this book where you have that kind of cobbled together family of Korean Jews and
strangers and people with very little connection, biological connection to one another, calling themselves a family.
And I think maybe that interest comes about partly at least as a result of my sort of uncertainty about just what my family was if my parents weren't married.
It's such a fundamental tenet of your life as a child that your parents are married to each other and that you have a mother and a father.
is broken, it really kind of throws everything into doubt, I think.
I read you as a very sensitive guy.
In some of the interviews I read, when the first book came out, you were married to another writer, and a lot of it was a joy in it.
I've just been doing the same thing myself.
This was my personal book, my writer, I just published.
And, you know, it's indescribable.
The only thing that surpasses it is having to go on.
I guess for you it was dampened a bit because of the anxiety of how your wife might have been responsible.
Yeah, it was.
Absolutely through no fault of her own.
In a way, it was a question of seamliness, if you know what I mean.
It was almost sort of unseemly.
It would have been unseemly somehow or I felt it, so to take too much obvious pleasure and so on.
You know, I guess I think at this point that it was probably a good thing in hindsight because it kept me from getting out of control or from taking it too seriously or from really believing.
I don't think it would have been my natural tendency to believe what people said about me anyway, but even if it had, I think
being in those circumstances really protected me.
I really haven't gotten into the reading the book critically is my job and so that's really a reason why we haven't
Fiction writers, for me, are the most demanding kinds of interviews because we are dealing with artistic work here.
It's not my job to ask you to explain what you did.
I should be able to do that.
Good, because I'm never very good at it anyway.
I do have to say, though, you must have been a young man.
You wrote this because one of the rules you're never supposed to do is hurt children and dogs.
did you hear anything from people um just no mostly laughter i think you know it's uh i don't know i suppose um